feat: namespace as a runtime routing dimension (engine + SDKs) (#1984)
MotiaDev/motia: docs/next/reference/engine-protocol.mdx

  "trigger_type": "http",
  "function_id": "math::add",
  "config": { "api_path": "/math/add", "http_method": "POST" },
  "metadata": null,
  "namespace": null
}
```

`config` is the per-trigger-type configuration; the shape is defined by whatever worker advertised
that `trigger_type` (e.g. `http` for `http` triggers). The engine responds with a
`TriggerRegistrationResult` carrying an optional `error: ErrorBody`.

`namespace` is optional and names the namespace `function_id` resolves in when the trigger fires. It
is independent of the registering connection's own namespace: an absent `namespace` means `default`,

> not "the namespace this worker registered under". The typed SDK helpers that pair a function with its

Reviewer: According to these docs this is a separate namespace from the one defined in compose/worker init/III_NAMESPACE? Why would it be separate?

Author: Good point. This is not a separate namespace system. It is the target namespace for the function that the trigger calls.

Usually, the target namespace is the same as the worker namespace. A trigger can also call a function in a different namespace. For this reason, `RegisterTrigger` includes the target `namespace`.

The typed helper sets this field to the worker namespace. The low-level `registerTrigger` API does not set it. If the field is not present, the target namespace is `default`.

I will update the documentation and add examples for both cases.

Author: Addressed in commit [`02af50fc`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/02af50fc). The docs now explain that this is the target namespace of the function called by the trigger, not a second namespace system. They also distinguish typed helpers from the low-level API.

call and surfaces this code to the caller), `function_not_found`, `function_not_invokable`,
`TIMEOUT` (client-side timeout), `FORBIDDEN` (RBAC denial).

A `function_not_found` message names the namespace the lookup ran in, and lists the namespaces where
the id does exist: `Function state::get not found in namespace default. It is registered in
namespace(s): orders, analytics.`

## `RegistrationRejected`

```json
{
  "type": "registrationrejected",
  "code": "WORKER_NAMESPACE_CONFLICT",
  "namespace": "orders",
  "worker_name": "state",
  "owner_worker_id": "3f9c1a2e-…"
}
```

Pushed when a registration collides with a worker that is already live in `namespace`.
`owner_worker_id` identifies the worker that holds the contested identity. `code` decides the
severity:

> | `code`                        | `worker_name` carries | Connection | Severity                                                                     |

Reviewer: worker_name has two different types of information in it potentially? This is an anti-pattern if true.

Author: Fixed in commit [`02af50fc`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/02af50fc809d5e36983abce4746410b3b09da2f9). `RegistrationRejected` now uses `worker_name` only for `WORKER_NAMESPACE_CONFLICT` and the separate `function_id` field for `FUNCTION_NAMESPACE_CONFLICT`. The engine, SDKs, console bridge, protocol documentation, and regression tests were updated accordingly.

| ----------------------------- | --------------------- | ---------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `WORKER_NAMESPACE_CONFLICT`   | the worker name       | closed by the engine | Fatal. The SDK stops the worker and does not reconnect.            |

> | `FUNCTION_NAMESPACE_CONFLICT` | the function id       | stays open | Non-fatal. Only that one registration is refused; the worker keeps serving its other functions. |

Reviewer: This can lead to unexpected behavior where a worker succeeds but some of its functions don't register. Then you can have someone expecting that worker to do something on an invocation like:

```js
iii.trigger("sendEmail", namespace: "1") // conflict, fails, another worker already registers "sendEmail"
iii.registerTrigger("emailSent", namespace: "1") // the worker that is live with sendEmail doesn't emit an emailSent event as expected
```

Author: Good point. The docs now state that worker registration and function registration are separate operations. They also explain that an early `RegisterFunction` message is held until the namespace is known; it is not registered in `default` and moved later.

The updated section makes the partial-registration behavior explicit: the current owner keeps the function, later invocations go to that owner, and the rejected worker stays connected with its other functions. It also warns that a connected worker does not confirm that all function registrations succeeded.

Addressed in commit [`72851e5`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/72851e51).

to the queue worker, which persists it and re-invokes the target function on a subscriber according
to the queue's retry policy.

## Namespaces

> A namespace is a routing dimension carried alongside a function id, never folded into it: `state::get`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A namespace is a routing dimension carried alongside a function id, never folded into it the function name. For example `state::get`
```

is `state::get` in every namespace. Registries are keyed by `(namespace, function_id)` and
`(namespace, worker_name)`, so the same id or worker name may appear once per namespace.

A worker declares its namespace on the `engine::workers::register` call

> ([`RegisterWorkerInput.namespace`](#engine-discovery-functions)), not on a protocol frame. A

Reviewer: We should never document what a function doesn't do.

```suggestion
A worker declares its namespace on the `engine::workers::register` call
([`RegisterWorkerInput.namespace`](#engine-discovery-functions)). A
```

connection that declares none lands in `default`.

### Resolution

Invocation routing is strict. It never falls back to another namespace and the caller's own namespace
never influences it:

| `InvokeFunction.namespace` | Resolves in           |
| -------------------------- | --------------------- |
| absent / `null`            | `default` only        |
| `"orders"`                 | `orders` only         |

A miss returns `function_not_found` naming the namespaces where the id does exist.

Introspection resolution is deliberately looser, so that an engine whose every worker is namespaced
can still answer questions about itself. For `engine::functions::info` and `engine::workers::info`
with no explicit `namespace`: a `default` entry wins; otherwise an id or name unique to one
non-default namespace resolves; an id or name present in several non-default namespaces at once is
reported as an ambiguity naming the candidates, never resolved by guessing. Passing an explicit

> `namespace` restores strict resolution.

Reviewer: This seems unhelpful. You'd want an agent or person querying without a namespace to be able to discover what is available in all namespaces not just `default`. Or have some other way of querying all namespaces. Otherwise you'll lead to a preference for the `default` namespace when it's inappropriate.

Author: The all-namespace discovery path is `engine::functions::list` and `engine::workers::list`. Both return entries from every namespace, and each row includes its `namespace`. The behavior described here applies only to `info`, which inspects one function or worker and must resolve a single identity. Without an explicit namespace, it preserves backward-compatible lookup: `default` wins, a unique non-default match resolves, and multiple non-default matches return an ambiguity. An agent can use `list` to discover the full catalog and then pass the selected namespace to `info`.

### Reserved ids

> `engine::*` is reserved for engine and builtin infrastructure, which lives in `default`. A worker

Reviewer: Is this going to impact other workers that expose engine::* functions? Namely the queue worker.

https://workers.iii.dev/workers/queue?tab=api#fn-engine::queue::dlq_messages several engine::* functions in it.

Also what happens when these queue engine functions are namespaced?

Author: Addressed in commit [`1e0425b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/1e0425beb3e4531c1fd54df319a0fa47786a6e87). The docs now state that the queue worker supplied with the engine registers its `engine::queue::*` functions in `default`, so the reserved-id check does not reject them. The rejection applies to a custom worker connection that registers an `engine::*` id in a non-default namespace.
